Göttingen is a university city in Lower Saxony, central Germany, the
capital of the eponymous district. The River Leine runs through it. At
the end of 2019, the population was 118,911.

The origins of Göttingen lay in a village called Gutingi, first
mentioned in a document in 953 AD. The city was founded northwest of
this village, between 1150 and 1200 AD, and adopted its name. In
medieval times the city was a member of the Hanseatic League and hence
a wealthy town.

Today, Göttingen is famous for its old university (Georgia Augusta, or
"Georg-August-Universität"), which was founded in 1734 (first classes
in 1737) and became the most visited university of Europe. In 1837,
seven professors protested against the absolute sovereignty of the
kings of Hanover; they lost their positions, but became known as the
"Göttingen Seven". Its alumni include some well-known historical
figures: the Brothers Grimm, Heinrich Ewald, Wilhelm Eduard Weber and
Georg Gervinus. Also, German Chancellors Otto von Bismarck and Gerhard
Schröder attended law school at the Göttingen University. Karl Barth
held his first professorship here. Some of the most famous
mathematicians in history, Carl Friedrich Gauss, Bernhard Riemann and
David Hilbert, were professors at Göttingen.

Like other university towns, Göttingen has developed its own quaint
traditions. On the day they are awarded their doctorate degrees,
students are drawn in handcarts from the Great Hall to the
Gänseliesel-Fountain in front of the Old Town Hall. There they have to
climb the fountain and kiss the statue of the Gänseliesel (goose
girl). This practice is actually forbidden, but the law is not
enforced. The statue is considered the most kissed girl in the world.

Nearly untouched by Allied bombing in World War II, the inner city of
Göttingen is now an attractive place to live with many shops, cafes
and bars. For this reason, many university students live in the inner
city and give Göttingen a youthful feel. In 2003, 45% of the inner
city population was only between 18 and 30 years of age.

Commercially, Göttingen is noted for its production of optical and
precision-engineered machinery, being the seat of the light microscopy
division of Carl Zeiss, Inc., and a main site for Sartorius AG which
specialises in bio-technology and measurement equipment—the region
around Göttingen advertises itself as "Measurement Valley".

Unemployment in Göttingen was 12.6% in 2003 and is now 7% (March
2014). The city's railway station to the west of the city centre is on
Germany's main north–south railway.

Göttingen has two professional basketball teams; both the men's and
women's teams play in the Basketball-Bundesliga. For the 2007–08
season, both teams will play in the 1st division.
